---
layout: post
tags: [software engineering, startups, saleswhale]
---
This post is dedicated to all the awesome people who helped make my Saleswhale experience so fun and enriching. 

{% include image.html file="saleswhale/saleswhale_offsite.jpg" description="Saleswhale off-site dinner at Javier's place. Friday 8 Jul 2018." %}

From the time I joined till today, the team has more than doubled. It has also been very impressive how far the product has evolved and grown over the last year.

I first learned about Saleswhale from Kuo-Yi from Monk's Hill ventures. He was my interviewer for MIT, and we met around Dec 2016. Knowing that he was a venture capitalist, I asked him if he could recommend me any interest startups to join after I complete my two years of National Service and before I enrol in college and he was very willing to.

{% include image.html file="saleswhale/joe_and_dough.jpg" description="Joe & Dough in Kallang Wave Mall, where I had my interview with Kuo-Yi." %}

As I neared the completion of my National Service in July, Kuo-Yi reached out to me again and referred me to a few startups. I had a chat with all of them, and the one that stood out and spoke to me most was my meeting with Gabriel from Saleswhale.

After my meeting with Gabriel, the engineering team sent me a technical take-home assignment, the details of which I will not share to respect the hiring process. I was thankful that I had block leave from my unit during the period so I could work on the task immediately. They were quite happy with what I made and I was invited down for a full-day technical interview with the engineering team.

{% include image.html file="saleswhale/saleswhale_sign.jpg" description="Finding the old office at Tras Street." %}

I headed down to Tras Street, which was where their old offices were before they moved to Keppel Towers. Vincent went through my take-home assignment, asked me a systems design question, and quizzed me with a whiteboard coding challenge. Kelvin did pair programming with me and introduced me Rspec and Ruby.

{% include image.html file="saleswhale/interview.jpg" description="Old Saleswhale office at Tras Street." %}
I e
