---
title: "Against Government Scholarships"
layout: post
tags: [general]
cover: assets/images/posts/yosemite_waterfall.jpg_resized
class: post-template
navigation: True
author: fanpu
---

Over the past few years, I've received numerous questions about studying abroad and whether it is advisable to take a government scholarship in order to do so from my juniors. 
Having been able to witness firsthand the early career trajectories of many scholars and non-scholars friends alike, and having been able to hear their different perspectives, I feel like I now have a good understanding of the problems at hand to answer this question confidently. 

This post is targeted towards Singaporean junior college students debating whether they should take on a scholarship from one of the government agencies in order to pursue a fully-paid education abroad. 

In this post, I will consider the pros and cons of taking a scholarship. The relevance of some of the points are highly dependent on your current situation, so ultimately you must still make your own value judgment.

## Why you should take a scholarship
### Financial Hardship

It is well-known that an overseas college education is expensive and can set you back by over half a million dollars. To make things worse, most universities do not offer financial aid for international students, and therefore for many families from humble backgrounds, a scholarship is the only realistic way to pay for their children's overseas education. 

### Major
If the career prospects from your choice of major is not significantly more attractive than working in the public sector, then taking a scholarship is a reasonable choice. However, there are many caveats to this decision. College is a time of academic exploration and self-discovery, and you may easily find yourself switching majors or finding your interests changed. If it so happens that your new major is in a relatively well-paying sector, then it will make financial sense for you to break your bond, albeit incurring hefty interest on the principal paid out by the scholarship so far. Therefore, you should only consider a scholarship if you are very confident about your commitment to your intended field of study.

### Desire to join Civil Service
People with a genuine heart to serve the country and work for a government agency are few and far between, and I sincerely applaud you if you fall into this camp. A scholarship in this case would be the best way to realize your careers and dreams.

## Why you should not consider scholarships

### Prestige

This is probably the worst reason to consider a scholarship. Unfortunately, the culture in JCs tend to glamorize and portray scholarship holders as the pinnacle of academic success and as a model for the rest of the student population to emulate, such that you are often compelled by those around you to apply as long as you are in good academic standing. I can very confidently assure you that nobody in overseas colleges will care about the fact that you are a scholar. Neither will employers or professors. I can say though for the boys (and some girls) who are reading this that they will be very intrigued and impressed by your experiences during National Service. 

### Complacency and Diminished Drive
Knowing that you are bonded to a scholarship after graduation for the next 6 years brings about a lack of agency and diminished accountability for your own future.

In Singapore, scholars have to spend the summer after their sophomore year interning at the respective government agencies that their scholarship bonds them to. 
This creates a problem where most scholars do not bother applying, or do not really try hard to apply for internships in their freshmen year. They justify it by the difficulty of getting an internship as a first year student, and also because their next internship has already been decided for them, and therefore it does not seem worth the effort to begin building their foundations for industry relevance. 

However, the implication of this choice means that by the time that they are in their junior year, they will be competing against other students who have at least one or two internships from American companies under their belt, which holds significantly more brand-name recognition and status than internships from foreign government agencies by recruiters.

Furthermore, the brand name effect of internships compounds. The following example will be biased towards software engineering roles, as that is what I am most familiar with. Few people land FAANG or HFT roles on their first try (excluding training programs like Google STEP or Facebook University) - most people usually start off by gaining experience at a startup or early unicorn, before using that experience and the brand name associated with it to clear increasingly selective resume screens. Repeat this a few times and the combined weight of all the brand names on your resume will get you through almost any door. 

In addition, scholars are usually only required to maintain good academic standing. This could set an artificially lower bar to shoot for than you could have otherwise achieved. On the flipside, the GPA requirement can also incentivize taking easier classes in order to protect your grades at the expense of growth and learning. It discourages risk taking and the taking of many hard classes, which are usually the most transformative classes.

### Unrealized Earning Potential

I don't know the exact numbers of how much government agencies are paying, but it's not amazing. GovTech does a bit better as they try to peg to industry salaries, although where you really want to be positioned is the market leader in setting salaries. If you are studying in the US, landing an entry-level role at most unicorns and FAANG companies can expect to fetch at least $200k annually pre-tax. Check out [levels.fyi](levels.fyi) if you want more specific data. If you go into industry, you will be leveled every few years with generous pay bumps, and you should definitely expect to become a senior engineer by the time you would otherwise have finished serving your bond (6 years).

As such, not only will you not have problems paying off student loans, you will also have gained very valuable industry experience, connections with the best and brightest devs from around the globe, and a recognized senior title that will help your future career prospects. On the other hand, it will be hard to go back into industry once you have been in public service for a couple of years. This is especially a problem if your agency is in a sensitive area like defence, where you cannot really share much about the work that you have done.

### Hindered from Achieving Your Fullest Potential

You never want to be the smartest person in the room.


*Banner picture: A waterfall along Half Dome Trail, Yosemite National Park*